now I'm going to be talking about
statistics things if that makes you
immediately feel a little bit weary
that's okay that doesn't make you some
kind of crazy conspiracy theorist it
makes you skeptical and when it comes to
numbers especially now you should be
skeptical but you should also be able to
tell which numbers are reliable and
which ones on so today I want to try to
give you some tools to be able to do
that but before I do I just want to
clarify which numbers I'm talking about
here I'm not talking about claims like
nine out of ten women would recommend
this anti-aging cream I think a lot of
us have always rolled our eyes at
numbers like that what's different now
is that people are questioning
statistics like the u.s. unemployment
rate is 5%
what makes this claim different is that
it doesn't come from a private company
it comes from the government and
actually now about four out of ten
Americans distrust the economic base
that gets reported by government among
support with the president camp it's
even higher it's about seven out of ten
now I don't need to tell anyone here
that there are a lot of dividing lines
in our society right now and a lot of
them start to make sense once you
understand people's relationships with
these government numbers see on the one
hand there are those who say that these
statistics are crucial but we need them
to make sense of society as a whole in
order to move beyond emotional anecdotes
and measure progress in this objective
way and then there are the others who
say that these statistics are elitist
maybe even riggs
they don't make sense and they don't
really reflect what's happening in
people's everyday lives now it kind of
feels like that second group is winning
the argument right now we're living in a
world of alternative facts where people
don't find statistics this kind of
common ground if starting point for
debate this is a problem there are
actually moves in the u.s. right now to
get rid of some government statistics
altogether
right now there's a bill in Congress
about measuring racial inequality the
draft law says that government money
should not be used to collect data on
racial segregation this is a total
disaster if we don't have this data how
can we observe discrimination let alone
fix it in other words how can a
government create fair policies if they
can't measure current levels of
unfairness and this isn't just
discrimination is everything think about
how can we legislate on health care if
we don't have good data on health or
poverty how can we have a public debate
about immigration if we can't all at
least agree on how many people are
entering and leaving the country
statistics come from the state that's
why they got their name and the point
was to base a measure of the population
in order to better serve it so we need
these government remembers but we also
have to move beyond either blimey
accepting or blaming rejecting them we
need to learn the skills to be able to
spot bad statistics now eyesight to
learn some of these when I was working
in a statistical Department as part of
the United Nations and our job was to
find out how many Iraqis had been forced
from their homes as a result of the war
and what they needed it was really
important work but it was also
incredibly difficult every single day we
were making decisions that affected the
accuracy of our numbers decisions like
which parts of the country we should go
to who we should speak to you which
questions we should ask and I started to
feel really disillusioned with her work
because we thought we were doing a
really good job but the one group of
people who could really tell us woody
Iraqis and they really got a chance to
find our analysis let alone question it
so I started to feel really determined
but the one way to make numbers more
accurate is to have as many people as
possible be able to question them so I
became a data journalist and my job is
finding these data sets and kind of
showing them with the public and anyone
can do this you don't have to be a geek
or a nerd you can ignore those words
they use by people who are trying to say
they're smart or pretending they're
humble absolutely anyone can do this so
I want to give you guys three questions
that will help you be able to spot some
bad statistics so question number one is
can you see uncertainty now one of the
things that's really changed people's
relationship with numbers and in fact
even their trust in the media has been
the use of piece equal polls now I
personally have a lot of issues with
political polls because I think that the
role of journalists is actually to
report the facts and not attempt to
predict them especially when those
predictions can actually damage
democracy by signaling to people don't
bother to vote for that guy he doesn't
have a chance
anyway let's put that aside for now and
talk about the accuracy of this endeavor
so based on national elections in the UK
Italy Israel and of course the most
recent u.s. presidential election using
polls to predict electoral outcomes is
about as accurate as using the moon
that's a pretty
hospital admissions no seriously I use
actual data from an academic study tour
this there are a lot of reasons why
polling has become so inaccurate our
societies have become really diverse
which makes it very difficult for
posters to get a really nice
representative sample of the population
for their polls people are really
reluctant to answer their phones to
postive and also shockingly enough
people might lie but you wouldn't
necessarily know that to look at the
media for one thing the probability of a
Hillary Clinton win was communicated
with decimal places we don't use decimal
places to describe the temperature how
on earth can predicting the behavior of
230 million voters in this country be
that precise and then there were those
sleep charts see a lot of data
visualizations will overstate certainty
and it works
these charts can numb our brains to
criticism when you hear a statistic you
might feel skeptical as soon as it's
buried in a chart it feels like some
kind of subjective science and it's not
so I was trying to find ways to better
communicate this to people to show
people the uncertainty in our numbers
and why did was I started taking real
data sets and turning them into
hand-drawn visualizations so that people
can see how imprecise the data is so
people can see that a human big beast a
human family laser and visualize it so
for example instead of finding out the
probability of getting the flu in any
given month you can see the rough
distribution of flu season this is is a
bad chart to show in February and but
it's also more responsible data
visualization because if you were to
show the exact probabilities maybe that
would encourage people to get their flu
jobs at the wrong time and now the point
of these shaky lines is so that people
remember these these imprecisions
but also that they don't necessarily
walk away with a specific number but
they can remember important facts facts
like injustice and inequality leave a
huge mark on our lives sites like black
Americans and Native Americans have
shorter life expectancies than those of
other races and that isn't changing
anytime soon facts like prisoners in the
u.s. can be kept in solitary confinement
cells that are smaller than the size of
an average parking place now the point
of these visualizations is also to
remind people of some really important
statistical concepts concepts like
averages so let's say you hear a claim
like the average swim
in the u.s. contained 6.33 fecal
accidents now that doesn't mean that
every single swimming pool in the
country contains exactly 6.23 toads so
in order to show that I went back to the
original data which comes from the CDC
who surveyed 47 swimming facilities and
I just spent one evening redistribute
and poop so you can kind of see how
misleading averages can be okay so the
second question that you guys should be
asking yourself to spot bad numbers is
can I see myself in the data now this
question is also about averages in a way
because part of the reason why people
are so frustrated with these national
statistics is they don't really tell the
story of who's winning and who's losing
from national policy it's easy to
understand why people are frustrated
with these global averages when they
don't match up with their personal
experiences so I really wanted to show
you people the way that data relates to
their everyday lives for si DIF advice
column called Damona where people would
write to me with questions and concerns
and I would try to answer them with data
people really ask me anything that
questions like is it normal to sleep in
a separate bed to my wife
so people regret their tattoos what does
it mean to die of natural causes and all
these questions are great because they
really make you think about ways to find
and communicate these numbers if someone
asks you how much pee is a lot of tea
which is a question that I got asked
here you really want to make sure that
the visualization makes sense to you as
many people as possible
now these numbers aren't unavailable
sometimes they just buried in the
appendix of an academic study and
they're certainly not inscrutable if you
really wanted to test these numbers and
urination volume you could grab a bottle
and try it out yourself the point of
this isn't necessarily that every single
data set has to relate specifically to
you I'm interested in how many women
which you finds in France for wearing
the faceful or the niqab even if I don't
live in France or wear the face well the
point of asking where you fit in is to
get as much context as possible it's
about zooming out from one data point
like the unemployment rate is 5% and
seeing how it changes over time or
seeing how it changes by educational
status this is why your parents always
wanted you to go to college or seeing
how it varies by gender nowadays now
unemployment rate is higher than the
female unemployment rate up until the
early 80s it was the other way around
see this is a story of one of the
biggest changes that's happened in
American society it's all
they're in that chart once you look
beyond the averages the axes are
everything once you change the scale you
can change the story okay so the third
and final question I want you guys to
think about when you're looking at
statistics is how was the data collected
and so far I've only talked about the
way that phaser is communicated but the
way it's collected matters just as much
and I know this is tough because
methodologies can be opaque and actually
kind of boring but there are still some
simple steps you can take to check this
so I'll use one last example here one
poll found that 41% of Muslims in this
country support your heart which is
obviously pretty scary and it was
reported everywhere in 2015 now when I
want to pick a number like that
I've start off by finding the original
questionnaire and it turns out that
journalists who report on that statistic
ignored a question lower down on the
survey asked respondents how they define
jihad and most of them defined it as
quote Muslims personal peaceful struggle
to be more religious only 16% defined it
as violent holy war against unbelievers
now this is a really important important
point based on those numbers it's
totally possible but no one in the
survey who defined it as violent holy
war also said they support it those two
groups might not overlap at all it's
also worth asking how this survey was
carried out this was something called an
opt-in poll which means that anyone
could have found it on the Internet and
completed it there's no way of knowing
those people really even identified as
Muslim and finally there were 600
respondents in that poll there are
roughly 3 million Muslims in this
country according to Pew Research Center
that means the poll spoke to roughly 1
in every 5,000 Muslims in this country
now this is one of the reasons why
government statistics are often better
than private statistics a poll might
speak to a couple hundred people maybe a
thousand or if you're laurio trying to
show your skincare products in 2005 when
you spoke to 48 women for claim that
they work the private companies that
have a huge interest in getting the
numbers right they just need the right
numbers government statisticians aren't
like that in theory at least they're
totally impartial not least because most
of them do their jobs regardless of
who's in power they're civil servants
and to do their jobs properly they don't
just speak to a couple hundred people
those unemployment numbers I keep on
referencing comes from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics
to make their estimates they speaks over
140,000 businesses in this country now I
get it is frustrating if you want to
test the statistic that comes from a
private company you can just buy the
face cream for you and a bunch of
friends test out and if it doesn't work
you can say the numbers were wrong but
how do you question government
statistics well you just keep on
checking everything find out how they
collected the numbers find out if you're
seeing everything on the chart that you
need to see but don't give up on the
numbers altogether because if you do
we'll be making public policy decisions
in the dark using nothing but private
interests to guide us thank you
[Applause]